[Music]
In this chapter we want to talk
about pointers and references.
What is a reference?
In contrast to a usual variable, where you wright
type name equals initialization, so "int i = 5;",
you can define a reference to give another name,
also to the "i" variable. So it's just an alias.
Basically refers to the same object,
but has now a different name.
Whenever you apply now an operation
to this reference, it is the same,
as if you directly apply it to the object, it is bound to.
It is also required,
that you initialize the reference, when you define it.
So you bind it directly to the object
and you also cannot bind it to another object later on.
If the reference is non const,
then you can only attach it to an object
of the same type, as the reference itself.
So this is checked.
So for example you can bind integer variable
to an integer reference,
but you cannot bind a double object to an integer reference.
Then there is the constant reference.
This is a little bit more flexible,
because it can also be bound to a constant object,
to a non constant object,
or the result of an expression.
So this is not possible,
when you have non-constant reference.
Of course a const reference cannot change the object
to it which it refers to.
Now in contrast to the reference as there is the pointer.
The pointer is something completely different.
The pointer is an object,
that holds the address of an object.
So it basically stores the your address in memory
and then you can look up at that address a certain object.
In order to initialize or also assign a pointer
you can now use a constant expression.
So that is for example the null pointer.
You can use an address of an object.
Here you use the address operator.
So for example you can assign the integer pointer "p"
the address of an integer variable.
Or you can also assign the address
one past the end of another object.
This is interesting in the context of iterators.
Or just another valid pointer of the same type.
So this is pointer.
And now if you compare them
and let's look at this example.
So you have two integer variables "i" and "j",
then you define pointers, so "pi"
and you assign it to the address of "i"
and address of "j" "pj",
then the next line this statement "pi = pj",
this would now assign the two pointers to each other.
So not the values,
that are found at the memory location,
but the pointers are assigned.
And in contrast to that, next line the "ri",
this is now a reference and here we can also assign "i",
but here without address operator,
because it is, as I have said, an alias,
so you couldn't just set it to "i" or to "j".
And then when you write "ri = rj"
then basically this assigns the values not to addresses.
So ways to compare pointers and references.
So the reference always refers to an object, as I have said.
And if you assign to a reference,
then you also change the underlying object.
The pointer of course you can assign a different address,
but you will not change the underlying values,
that are found on at that address.
Now if you combine that with the const qualifier,
it becomes a little bit more complicated.
So i want to show here some examples.
In the first line you have here a constant pointer.
So the constant pointer to double.
Is this correct?
No it isn't, because it is a pointer to a constant double.
So the idea is to read it from right to left.
So this means it's a pointer
and pointer points to a constant double.
So when you try to set the value at that address
this will result in an error,
because the underlying value should be const.
In the next example the "curErr"
here you have basically a constant pointer now.
Not a pointer to a constant.
Again read from the right to the left.
So it is a constant pointer to integer.
And in this case you can
change the underlying value the integer,
but you cannot change the address.
"curErr = curErr" here you try to reassign
the "curErr" pointer
and this will result in an error.
And the last example, this "pi" pointer, this is now both.
So you have here a constant pointer to a constant double.
So here you cannot set the pointer to another address
and you also cannot change the underlying value,
because it's also const object.
Next thing is now a new kind of reference
and the reason to introduce that was,
that one wants to move objects.
So classically if you copy objects
often temporaries are involved,
but if you move objects from one thing to another,
then basically the old thing,
that you have moved is or can be destroyed
and the content is completely moved to the new thing.
So this means it can be really a performance boost,
because you save these temporaries.
Now the underlying language feature that supports that
is the rvalue reference.
and strictly speaking rvalue reference is exactly
the opposite of a classical reference.
And you can assign all things you cannot assign
to a classical reference.
So here the example "int i = 42;"
and the new syntax is now two times the address operator.
So to say this is an rvalue reference now the "rr"
and here you can assign a temporary.
So "i*42", this is evaluated
and it returns temporary result
in a temporary object.
And you could also assign 42 for example,
or you try to assign "i"
and then you get an error message,
because "i" is a classical variable.
This one you can assign to a usual reference,
but you cannot assign it to the rvalue reference.
So rvalue references refer again to object,
that's the reason why they are called references,
but those objects are about to be destroyed.
So they are not variables.
So the lvalues is a term that basically says,
it can be on the left-hand side of an assignment.
They are for example classical variables
and have persistent state.
The rvalues, they are on the right-hand side of an assignment,
they can be literals or temporaries
and therefore for example temporaries they expire soon.
So these are the different kinds of values.
So you can as a repetition, remember that
the expression is lowest level of computation.
You have operands you have your return or result
and you basically have operators involved.
These operators are trust symbols
and they tell you what to do.
So it can be multiplication, plus, assignment,
so we have a list of predefined operators in C++.
In addition to the list of operators
you also need to specify the precedence.
So which operator is executed first basically.
So classical example is "a * b + c",
this is a complex expression
and then you have to specify, okay,
first times is executed
and then the plus operator for example.
The associativity. This is interesting if you have now
two operators involved, that have the same precedence,
or that are the same.
So example is "a == b == c".
Then you can evaluate that from left to right,
or from right to left and this is the associativity.
Also, this we will see in another part,
you can overload these operators
and change basically the behavior,
for your own class types.
Now, why do I talk about these expressions again?
Because you can categorize now the expressions.
So the involved operands,
they are either lvalues or rvalues
and this can be even further detailed.
So the lvalues, you have
kind of an intermediate thing here in the hierarchy.
This is a generalized lvalue
and the generalized lvalue can now be a classical lvalue,
so a variable, or an xvalue.
An xvalue this is something new,
that was introduced in the C++ 11 standard is an expiring value.
So a temporary for example.
And then on the other hand you have the rvalues
and they are also either an xvalue or they are prvalue
and this is a pure rvalue.
So this sounds complicated at first sight,
but it's very important to know,
because then you exactly understand,
what you can assign to what in your program
and what exactly happens.
So here again the full definitions,
so lvalue is an expression,
that yields an object or function.
An xvalue is an expiring value,
that refers to an object.
Usually it is near the end of its lifetime.
So that enables you to move the resources.
prvalue is a pure rvalue. This is just not an xvalue.
This glvalues generalized lvalue
and the rvalue, this is an expression,
that yields a value, but not the associated location.
So that means it's kind of a literal, for example.
In order to let this settle down a little bit,
we see some examples.
So the classical example is here
just define integer "i" the variable
and then "i = 1". So the "i", what kind of value is it?
It is an lvalue, so that's a classical object classical variable.
Next example is now a pointer to integer.
And again we set the "ip", so the value
at that memory location to one.
What is this? It's again an lvalue.
And third example integer "i" and "i = 1".
Now we look at the right side
and this one, the one is now an rvalue definitely.
It's more specifically and pure rvalue so a prvalue.
This is a literal.
More interesting are the use cases,
when functions are involved,
especially the return type of function.
So this function returns reference to float
Internally it defines a local variable "f" and returns "f".
Here is some warning, of course this is in general
not a good idea to have a local variable
and return it,
because when it goes out of scope,
the local variable it is cleaned up
and you should not use it outside the function anymore.
But in this example we will not use it,
so that doesn't matter.
It's just about to show you what kind of value this is.
And since it is a usual reference,
you can assign a value to it
and that makes it an lvalue.
So what we get here is an lvalue.
So you can assign something to the return value.
The next example is now float without reference.
And here you return just a constant, so 2.
As we have said 2 is a literal
and what you return here is then again a pure rvalue.
And the last example this is now the rvalue reference
and in this case, again if you return 2.
What happens? Now you get an xvalue
in this rvalue reference.
So these are now our examples for the different kinds
of values you have in the current C++ language
[Music]
it goes out of scope or is deleted and
the compiler here automatically destroys
each member for the members of class
type the corresponding destructors are
invoked and for the built-in or compound
types no explicit work is done to
destroy them so when the object pointer
to pointer member is not deleted this
means you can have a memory leak and
therefore basically all memory that you
have dynamically allocated in the class
you have also to free in the destructor
that was it for the theoretical part so
next we go to direct programming
examples see you for the next video